More families will have access to online parenting and family support programmes in response to the continued disruption caused by COVID-19 and the Omicron variant, Health Minister Andrew Little says. “The Positive Parenting Programme (Triple P) series of programmes offer practical advice, easy-to-use resources and strategies for parents to help their children and teens cope with life’s ups and downs. “Just as the vaccine programme has been key, supporting mental wellbeing has also been a vital part of this Government’s response to COVID-19. ”“We know that this pandemic has been particularly tough on young people and for some, the return to school after an extended break may add to the stress. These programmes will help parents better support their children to be more resilient, ” Andrew Little said. The programmes were made available to parents during last year’s Delta lockdown in Auckland with very positive feedback, and from this week will be available to parents anywhere in the country. “We know COVID-19 has caused stress for many families with worries about money, work and schooling. While these issues are separate, all of them can affect mental health. This is about supporting parents and children to manage their wellbeing over the long term, ” Andrew Little said. “We know by investing early in psychosocial supports, some of the personal effects of COVID-19 can be minimised, and long-term mental wellbeing can be better supported, ” Andrew Little said. The programmes are funded as part of the Government’s $5.6 million psychosocial package announced in November. The available Triple P suite of online programmes include –Triple P Online, Teen Triple P Online, andFear-Less Triple P Online. Triple P’s online courses, including thefree guide to parenting during COVID-19, can be found atwww.triplep-parenting.net.nzENDSNotes:What we have achieved since Budget ‘19As of 30 November 2021 - The Access and Choice programme:The Budget 19 Access and Choice Programme has four work streams: Youth, Māori, Pacific, Integrated Primary Mental Health and Addiction services (IPMHA)Over 300 GP sites delivering Integrated Primary Mental Health and Addiction services across New Zealand. Additional 18 youth specific (incl one national contract with Youthline), 9 Pacific specific and 20 kaupapa Māori services contracted. More than 820 full-time equivalents (FTE) have been contracted to provide services (across all four work streams). Over 280,000 sessions delivered by new primary mental health and addiction services across the four work streams to date.800 Additional Māori and Pacific cultural competency workforce training places each yearOther Government mental health and wellbeing announcements:$4.6million wellbeing support to Rainbow young peopleThe Youth Mental Wellbeing FundThe first reportof the Government’s Implementation Unit that found strong progress has been made since the Mental Health and Addictions Package was announced in 2019. Kia Manawanui– the Long term pathway - the first 10-year plan of its kind that targets the cause of mental distress and sets out how to achieve pae ora – healthy futures. Pacific Suicide Prevention SupportInnovation fundfor more mental health initiatives